What is Primary Education?
Primary education is the first stage of formal education, which comes after pre-school or kindergarten. It focuses on learning and educational activities that are designed to improve skills like reading, writing, and mathematics at the early stages of education. Primary education takes place in primary schools and elementary schools.

Primary education may begin at the age of 5-7 and may end around 11-13years. The age range for receiving primary education can be different from one country to the other. Although there are many differences in the age range and number of years for primary education among different countries, the curriculum includes similar content. Primary education basically focuses on the fundamentals of skills and builds a foundation for learning. According to the United Nations Children’s Fund, there are a lot of benefits in providing primary education to students. It can help to decrease poverty, decrease the child mortality rate, and encourage gender equality. At the same time, primary education prepares students for secondary education.


What is Secondary Education?
Secondary education refers to the second stage of traditional education that comes after primary education. The age range for the start of secondary education is 11-13, and it ends around 15-18. These age limits can change from one nation to the other. In most countries, secondary education is marked compulsory.

Moreover, secondary education is divided into lower secondary education and upper secondary education in some countries, whereas some countries simply use the term secondary education. Secondary education is one of the crucial phases in the formal education system since it delivers education for the younger generation. Secondary education promotes life skills and focuses on areas like literary-philosophical studies, economics, social sciences, mathematics, physical sciences, earth sciences, biological sciences, and scientific and industrial technology. The terminology that is used for secondary education is different from one country to the other. Upper schools, gymnasium, high schools, lyceums, middle schools, and vocational schools are some of them.


What is the Difference Between Primary Education and Secondary Education?
The key difference between primary education and secondary education is that primary education focuses on the basics of reading, writing, and mathematics, whereas secondary education focuses on subjects like literary-philosophical studies, economics, social sciences, mathematics, physical sciences, earth sciences, and biological sciences. Also, another difference between primary education and secondary education is that primary education begins around 5-7 years and may end around 11-13 years, whereas secondary education may begin around 11-13 years and ends in 15-18 years.

Moreover, primary education prepares students for secondary education, while secondary education prepares the students for higher universities. Educators have a comparatively simple and small syllabus for primary education and a vast and wide syllabus for secondary education.

Below is a summary of the difference between primary education and secondary education in tabular form for side by side comparison.


Primary Levels
♦ English

English enables students to communicate confidently and effectively and to develop the critical skills to respond to a range of information, media and texts with understanding and enjoyment. Students can develop a first language competency in English to be successful in any culture and to promote cross-cultural understanding. It can develop students’ speaking, listening, reading and writing skills in English.

♦ Mathematics

The mathematics curriculum framework explores five content areas: number, geometry, measure, handling data and problem-solving. This curriculum focuses on principles, patterns, systems, functions and relationships so that students can apply their mathematical knowledge and develop a holistic understanding of the subject.

♦ Science

This curriculum framework covers four content areas: scientific enquiry, biology, chemistry and physics. Scientific enquiry is about considering ideas, evaluating evidence, planning, investigating, recording and analyzing data. Environmental awareness and some history of science are also part of the curriculum.

Minor Subjects (Primary level):
♦ ICT

♦ Myanmar

♦ EL

♦ English/ Chinese

♦ Physical Education

♦ Health Education

♦ Arts and Craft

♦ Social Studies

♦ Music

Secondary Levels
♦ English

English enables students to communicate confidently and effectively and to develop the critical skills to respond to a range of information, media and texts with understanding and enjoyment. Students can develop a first language competency in English to be successful in any culture and to promote cross-cultural understanding. It can develop students’ speaking, listening, reading and writing skills in English.

♦ Mathematics

The curriculum framework explores six content areas: number, algebra, geometry, measure, handling data and problem solving. The first five content areas are all underpinned by problem solving, which provides a structure for the application of mathematical skills. Mental strategies are also an important part of the number content. The curriculum focuses on principles, patterns, systems, functions and relationships, so that learners apply their mathematical knowledge and develop a holistic understanding of the subject.

♦ Science

This curriculum framework covers four content areas: scientific enquiry, biology, chemistry and physics. Scientific enquiry is about considering ideas, evaluating evidence, planning investigative work, and recording and analyzing data. The scientific enquiry objectives underpin biology, chemistry and physics, which are focused on developing confidence and interest in scientific knowledge. Environmental awareness and some history of science are also part of the curriculum.

Minor Subjects (Secondary level):
♦ History

♦ Geography

♦ ICT

♦ EL

♦ Physical Education

♦ Music

Primary Teaching Methods
Questions and Questioning
Speaking and listening
Reading books
Reading documents
Children writing
Learning about Time
The Visual Image
Objects
Maps and Plans
Story-telling
Drama and role play
Simulations and games
Expressive movement and freeze frames
Sites and the environment
History Investigations


1. Student-Centered Discussions
I admit that I do enjoy being the "sage on the stage" in my classroom, but I realize that this does little to engage my students in deep thinking. I want my students to be at the center of their learning.
Previously, when we read a book or short story, I'd ask questions to the whole class. Inevitably, the same five or six students would answer the questions, and I'd assume everyone understood. Now, I create small groups of three or four students, and they answer the questions in those small groups first, ensuring all students have an opportunity to participate.
I've seen an increase in comprehension, speaking and listening skills, and test scores. Implementing student-centered discussions is fairly easy to do—just create thought-provoking questions that dive deep into the content. The rewards are definitely worth it.

2. Making Connections
It is absolutely essential that the teaching methods you use help students make connections to their learning. Real-life connections make learning interesting and relevant for students.
When I teach Macbeth, for example, I have my students focus on the idea of setting goals. They examine how ambition can be both positive and negative, and I have them study recent world leaders to help them understand the real-life implications of this concept.
Further reading: Create an Engaged and Positive Classroom Culture
A history teacher at my school conducts a G20 conference in his classroom, with students representing countries and focusing on specific issues. The students' goal is to explore the problems of each specific region and form relationships with other nations in order to address them. This helps students personally identify with international issues in a way they never could before.
In physics class, students build their own physical models to apply theory to real life. Examine your curriculum and see what relatable applications you can bring into the classroom. Students will be much more engaged, and those real-world connections will help students understand the content and theories you're teaching much better than by simply reading a textbook.

3. Increased Autonomy
After reading the research on student autonomy, I wanted to increase student independence in my classroom. This year, I've allowed my students to pick from several prompts when writing an essay. Because it's important to tie learning to students' personal interests, I permit students to choose their own topics for research papers and to choose which projects they want to explore.
I make sure to still provide my students with clear learning goals, but they are able to make their own choices within that framework. Autonomy helps engage and empower my students, and it enables them to have a voice in their learning.

4. Building Relationships
Building relationships in the classroom is extremely powerful for students' behavioral and academic success. Teachers can help build relationships by meeting with students during office hours and creating team-building projects like student videos.
Further reading: Building a Joyful Classroom
Attending student sporting events and after-school activities also provides a great launching pad for discussion. Finally, I like to have a few minutes of "real talk" each week in my classroom for students to discuss topics that are important to them, and that helps break down walls and build solidarity in the classroom.

5. A Focus on Literacy
I'm always trying to improve my students' reading. Providing students with reading material that interests them and helps them to understand the joys of reading for pleasure. I make sure my classroom is well-stocked with books I know young adults enjoy.
In addition, if I see a strong op-ed piece online or in the newspaper, I'll share it with my students. I've noticed that my students now come to me when they read something compelling and thought-provoking, and they've become stronger readers and writers as a result.
These are the best teaching methods I've utilized this year. How about you? What are the best methods and strategies that have worked in your classroom? Comment below!

